WebRTC Encoded Transforms docs (#28439)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/webrtc_api/using_encoded_transforms/index.md

---

> title: Using WebRTC Encoded Transforms

Author: Note, I am aware this is not sentence case. I'm treating it as a proper name "WebRTC Encoded Transform". I might be convinced otherwise.

Reviewer: This is good in my opinion

slug: Web/API/WebRTC_API/Using_Encoded_Transforms
page-type: guide
browser-compat: api.RTCRtpReceiver.transform
---

{{DefaultAPISidebar("WebRTC")}}

> WebRTC Encoded Transforms provide a high performance [Streams API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Streams_API)-based framework for web applications to modify incoming and outgoing WebRTC encoded video and audio frames, using a {{DOMxRef("TransformStream")}} running in a worker.

Reviewer: Minor one, but I'm not sure about calling it a 'framework'. Could we call it a 'collection of high-performance Streams API components for web applications...'?

The spec calls it an "API surface" but we could be friendlier and call it a 'collection of APIs' or 'components using Streams API', what do you reckon?

Author: Well, it is a framework:  "A framework is a structure that you can build software on. It serves as a foundation, so you're not starting entirely from scratch.".  But perhaps you youth are only used to seeing it applied to things like Django and Bootstrap and such like. Phooey.

I'll modify it like this. More to do, as Byron pointed out that TransformStream is just one possible implementation. SOmething for Monday.

```suggestion
WebRTC Encoded Transforms provide mechanism to inject a high performance [Streams API](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Streams_API) for modifying encoded video and audio frame into the incoming and outgoing WebRTC pipelines.
```

> This enables use cases such as end-to-end encryption of encoded frames by third-party code.

Reviewer: Not just third-party encryption, but other processing and transformations. According to this one: https://chromestatus.com/feature/5116073827893248 

>manipulation of WebRTC encoded media without decoding them first

and

>we want to support the use case of glitch-free forwarding of media coming from multiple redundant peer connections. In this case, different input peer connections provide the same media payload but with different metadata.

> The framework defines both main thread and worker side objects.

Reviewer: Same comment in these paras about using "framework" as there's connotations about what that implies - maybe set or collection of APIs?

Author: Meh. I think I'll just call it the API - that's broad enough people can assume WebRTC or Web RTC Encoded Transform interfaces, and they'll be right.

```suggestion
The API defines both main thread and worker side objects.
```

```js
peerConnection.ontrack = (event) => {
  const worker = new Worker("worker.js");
  event.receiver.transform = new RTCRtpScriptTransform(worker, {
    name: "receiverTransform",
  });
  received_video.srcObject = event.streams[0];
};
```

Note again that you can add the transform stream at any time.
However by adding it in the `track` event handler ensures that the transform stream will get the first encoded frame for the track.

## Worker implementation

The worker script must implement a handler for the {{domxref("DedicatedWorkerGlobalScope/rtctransform_event", "rtctransform")}} event, creating a [pipe chain](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Streams_API/Concepts#pipe_chains) that pipes the `event.transformer.readable` ({{DOMxRef("ReadableStream")}}) stream through a {{DOMxRef("TransformStream")}} to the `event.transformer.writable` ({{DOMxRef("WritableStream")}}) stream.

A worker might support transforming incoming or outgoing encoded frames, or both, and the transform might be hard coded, or configured at run-time using information passed from the web application.

### Basic WebRTC Encoded Transform

> The example below shows a basic WebRTC Encoded transform, which simply negates all bits in queued frames.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below shows a basic WebRTC Encoded transform, which negates all bits in queued frames.
```

> It does not use (or need) any options passed in from the main-thread because exactly the same algorithm can be used in the sender pipeline to negate the bits and the receiver pipeline to restore them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It does not use or need options passed in from the main thread because the same algorithm can be used in the sender pipeline to negate the bits and in the receiver pipeline to restore them.
```

The transform running in the worker is inserted into the incoming or outgoing WebRTC pipeline by adding the `RTCRtpScriptTransform` to {{domxref("RTCRtpReceiver.transform")}} or {{domxref("RTCRtpSender.transform")}}, respectively.

A counterpart {{domxref("RTCRtpScriptTransformer")}} object is created in the worker thread, which has a {{domxref("ReadableStream")}} `readable` property, a {{domxref("WritableStream")}} `writable` property, and an `options` object passed from the associated {{domxref("RTCRtpScriptTransform")}} constructor.
Encoded video frames ({{domxref("RTCEncodedVideoFrame")}}) or audio frames ({{domxref("RTCEncodedAudioFrame")}}) from the WebRTC pipeline are enqueued on `readable` for processing.

The `RTCRtpScriptTransformer` is made available to code as the `transformer` property of the {{domxref("DedicatedWorkerGlobalScope/rtctransform_event", "rtctransform")}} event, which is fired at the worker global scope whenever an encoded frame is enqueued for processing (and initially on construction of the corresponding {{domxref("RTCRtpScriptTransform")}}).

> The worker code must implement a handler for the event that reads encoded frames from `transformer.readable`, modifies them as needed, and writes them to `transformer.writable` in the same order and without any duplication.

Author: FYI This is all strictly accurate, but it is quite dense, and perhaps too detailed for an intro. 

What I'm trying to say is that the  worker side object is the injected stream API that exposes the readable on which new encoded frames are enqueued and the writable that we can pipe the frames to after transforming. 
The main thread side defines the worker thread in which this interface is created and is what gets added to the sender/receiver to insesert the worker-side object into the pipeline.

But I have spent too long trying to simplify and am now to close. We can revisit if you think this is too confusing, after the rest is done.

While the interface doesn't place any other restrictions on the implementation, a natural way to transform the frames is to create a [pipe chain](/en-US/docs/Web/API/Streams_API/Concepts#pipe_chains) that sends frames enqueued on the `event.transformer.readable` stream through an {{DOMxRef("TransformStream")}} to the `event.transformer.writable` stream.

> We can use the `event.transformer.options` property to configure any transform code that depends on whether the transform is enqueuing incoming frames from the packetizer or outgoing frames from a codec.

Author: FYI This is a change made following developer feedback. You don't have to use TransformStreams if you don't want. So what I have done is try capture "this is what the rules say, but TransformStream is a natural approach and that's what we demonstrate.

You can also use the port to send messages back to the main thread.

```js
event.transformer.options.port.onmessage = (event) => {
  // The message payload is in 'event.data';
  console.log(event.data);
};
```

### Triggering a key frame

Raw video is rarely sent or stored because it consumes a lot of space and bandwidth to represent each frame as a complete image.
Instead, codecs periodically generate a "key frame" that contains enough infomation to construct a full image, and between key frames sends "delta frames" that just include the changes since the last delta frame.
While this is far more efficient that sending raw video, it means that in order to display the image associated with a particular delta frame, you need the last key frame and all subsequent delta frames.

This can cause a delay for new users joining a WebRTC conference application, because they can't display video until they have received their first key frame.
Similarly, if an encoded transform was used to encrypt frames, the recipient would not be able to display video until they get the first key frame encrypted with their key.

> In order to ensure that a new key frame can be sent as early as possible when needed, the {{domxref("RTCRtpScriptTransformer")}} object in `event.transformer` has two methods: {{domxref("RTCRtpScriptTransformer.generateKeyFrame()")}}, which causes the codec to generate a key frame, and {{domxref("RTCRtpScriptTransformer.sendKeyFrameRequest()")}}, which a receiver can use to request a key frame from the sender.

Reviewer: This section is great 👍🏻
